# In Reply to a Question about the Use of Snorkels

[Originally posted on Usenet on rec.scuba
 but not linking to the original due to
 a humiliating number of dumb spelling
 errors. Some minor edits in this version.]

You can check the Google archives for this
newsgroup for lots and lots and lots and lots on
the subject of whether snorkels are valuable.
Since you asked for opinions, but not expert
opinions, I thought I would mention that in all my
long, er, months of diving, I've never needed one.
There were a few times early on when I had one and
found it was irritating and in the way, but I've
never actually needed it. If you get used to doing
surface swims on your back it may at first seem
strange that you have to occasionally turn over
and look where you're going and take a kind of
mental bearing on whatever is in the exact
opposite direction, but it gets second nature
pretty quickly. Or rather, since I shouldn't try
to speak for you, I just mean that's what I have
found.

I would suspect that they are a pretty real
entanglement hazard in open water, and I'd never
use them in a confined space. Also, the mouthpiece
is right there in the same area as your primary
regulator.  I can't think off-hand of any good
gory scenarios, but on principle I like the idea of
keeping that area fairly clear of junk that gets
in the way of hoses and regulators when you or
your buddy might need one.  This is especially
true if you already necklace your backup rather
than use an octo. In any case, the things
definitely get in the way for me.

As a side note, people talk about wings tending to
pitch you forward in the water on the surface (as
against a jacket-style BC). I wondered if this
would make it harder to surface swim on my back.
It turns out that the wing made it much easier to
lay back completely and minimize drag. Cool. So
there's one more point against the need for a
snorkel for me. If you really lay back and relax
and zen out you can cover a lot of ground pretty
quickly this way. You don't re-breathe any air,
like with a snorkel. That's if you're on the move.
If you're just sitting there, waiting for a boat
or something, like you mentioned as a possibility,
then why do you need or even want your face in the
water anyway? I'd be too busy waiving or shouting
or whistling or something to want to be looking
down in the water. And if you are afraid you can't
get your face out of the water then there are
other problems. I personally, between my wing and
my drysuit can just about be out of the water to
my stomach if I really need to (okay I'm slightly
exaggerating). If you're diving wet and it's
really an emergency, drop some weight.

You could say that if you absolutely have to have
a snorkel then get one of those that roll or fold
up and carry it in a drysuit pocket.  But really
that seems like a solution to a non-problem. I
know it's pretty snotty coming from me, but it
seems like if one really thinks one needs a
snorkel, then it might be worth it to reconsider
the dive plan or something.

The bottom line is that although I don't have the
experience to say that snorkels are 100% useless,
and certainly someone could contrive some scenario
where they could come in handy, I can say that for
me so far they have been 100% useless, and that I
have thought of enough good reasons why they could
be actively bad that I would need a damn good
reason to carry one.

     Evans Winner
     Seattle, Washington
     June 8, 2003

