# MUSIC FOR TOY PIANO

Cornish College here in Seattle was able to bring us a
program of the music of Cornish favorite son, John Cage, and
others, in PONCHO Concert Hall last night. The extraordinary
Margret Leng Tan was the lone performer of the evening. Tan
is an accomplished (the program notes bill her as the
'foremost') interpreter of Cage's early prepared piano music
and now specializes in the small but interesting repertoire
for toy piano; Cage's 'Suite for Toy Piano' was the main
musical prize of the evening.

The performance began with a very short film called WORXOK
by someone simply named Trimpin, with the bell-like sounds
of toy piano for accompaniment. Someone appeared to hold
some kind of screen in front of the projector lens to create
a diffuse visual effect. Shots passed of dogs, and of old
women grooming themselves. The effect was somewhat
mystifying, though the music was pleasant.

After the film, Tan took the stage, clad in an aqua,
Chinese-cut blouse, and played Cage's 1940 'Bacchanale' for
prepared piano--famed as the first such work, and first
performed right there in PONCHO Hall as accompaniment to a
Syvilla Fort dance number. Tan, here on spiritual home turf,
played with the casual ease of a student alone in a practice
room.

As with much early Cage, the piece substitutes for a lack of
harmonic interest with drum pattern-like ostinati. The
effect is successful in general, though the preparation of
the piano necessarily reduces, quite substantially, the
dynamic range of the instrument, and thus makes more
difficult the task of producing a convincing climax--a
noticeable failure in the 'Bacchanale' through no fault of
its interpreter. Yet compared to Cage's later, far more
'avant' works, it is the early prepared piano pieces that
are aging best, and for which he will likely be remembered
longest.

Tan plays in what I call the Juilliard style of modern
pianism--something difficult to define, but characterized by
a too-dry, too-articulated, too emphasized approach to the
playing of runs and other fast figurations; something
mechanical, and a tendency to atomize long musical phrases
into short, three or four-note units. It is, of course, not
limited to alumnus of that school, but I have come to
associate it with Juilliard. In Tan's case, it may come from
all the practice on the toy piano, which requires a very
deliberate touch. Her ear for sonority, however, is
wonderful. She was perfectly made to play the music of such
composers as Cage and Crumb, who specialize in timbral
subtlety.

The Suite for Toy Piano, in five short movements--a
centerpiece of Tan's repertoire--was great fun. One movement
employs an idea in which each hand plays a mirror image of
the other; a final movement gives the audience one of the
only conventionally tuneful moments in Cage's entire oeuvre.

Of the remaining works, all receiving their Seattle
premiers, first was a Toby Twinning arrangement for toy
piano of the Beatles tune Eleanor Rigby. The arrangement is
heavy-handed for the tiny piano--with the loud noise of its
action and the complexity of its metallic sound, the spare
textures of the Cage come off, where the Romantic density of
the Twinning work approaches undifferentiated noise. This
noise and the dynamic limits of the instrument remind one of
harpsichord, and one thinks that the solution of the
Renaissance composers--counterpoint, rather than harmonic
interest and density--might serve the instrument better.

Next was 'Chooks' from 'Old McDonald's Yellow Submarine' by
Erik Griswold. The short, fun piece uses fast, open chords
on the toy piano alternating with quick hits to the
woodblocks; simple and crowd-pleasing. Next a tarantella:
'Mirabella' by Stephen Montague. Again, the work is too
densely chordal to sound on the noisy instrument. The
harmonies are Italio-Spanish modal standard. The piece is
essentially a showpiece and as such has some nice moments,
the final bars particularly.

Last we hear Twinning's 1995 'Satie Blues' for piano and toy
piano, played by one performer, one hand on each instrument.
The work is a melancholy meditation with toy piano generally
taking the lead, and 'adult' piano (as Ms. Tan calls it) in
accompaniment. Mr. Twinning seems to be a composer somewhat
in the modern Hollywood mold. Mild triadic modal harmonies
succeed one another under pleasantly evocative tunes. Less
successful, though, was his attempt to use tremolo passages
on the toy piano as transitional material, which gave a
jarringly clangorous effect. The work was perhaps the most
conventionally pleasing work of the evening, though a bit of
a downer to end on.

After Tan's show we watched Evans Chan's documentary,
'Sorceress of the New Piano: The Artistry of Margaret Leng
Tan'--an occasionally interesting two-hour commercial for
the performer. But if that's what it takes to bring such
artists here from New York to play such interesting
repertoire, then I for one am willing to sit through the
commercial. The Seattle Weekly ran a kind of running gag
throughout its classical event listings this week about the
presence of Mozart on nearly all the programs. A sadly valid
observation, but one not applicable to this
event--consisting as it did of only one dead composer, who
died less than fifteen years ago, and the rest still alive
and kicking. So general kudos to Cornish and to Margaret
Tan.

     Evans Winner
     Seattle Washington
     January, 2006

