# A TALE OF TWO CONDUCTORS

The last two days I have had the opportunity to observe two
very different conductors at work. I saw Gerard Schwarz
conduct the Seattle Symphony on Saturday the 5th of June.
They did selections from Mendelssohn’s Midsummer Night's
Dream and his violin concerto with James Ehnes playing the
solo part (he got off to a bit of a slow start, but
all-in-all did a fine job). They also played Strauss’s Ein
Hilden Lieben.

I’m pleased to report that the Seattle Symphony is getting
better at ignoring Schwarz.

I know that’s a pretty harsh thing to say, but having been
in a number of conducted ensembles over the years I think
that to some extent I can judge him as a player. When I
watch him and ask myself if I would find any of what he is
doing useful as a player, I have to answer--occasionally.

He does good cueing, I think. I only noticed a couple of
“thanks for coming,” after the fact cues. In particular, he
likes to cue the violin sections at his extreme right and
left (they were seated European style). He does this even
when their part is obvious. I think he likes cueing the
violins because it allows him to turn dramatically to
extreme profile for the audience. But that’s just a
suspicion.

He doesn’t like standard stick patterns. I know that in
passages in the Mendelssohn works that are pretty clearly in
four or three he assiduously avoided both patterns as taught
to college freshmen. In fact, rarely did two measures go by
with the same pattern employed in both. In slow music he
dispensed altogether with beating time and more or less
mimed the phrase shape. In faster music he seemed to be
trying to conduct each rhythmic unit separately. When the
music became more intense he liked to add beats to the
measure. Sometimes as many as four or five extras. Never the
same twice. He liked to give a lot of upbeats to big
downbeat entrances--sort of the way one would conduct the
opening bars of Beethoven’s Fifth if you wanted to conduct
each of the da da da’s. He liked to follow that with a few
similar afterbeats after the downbeat too. The orchestra
just came in wherever they had rehearsed to come in.

We were pretty close to the front, so I don’t think the
speed of sound time delay was much of a factor, so I can
report that, although there was not actually any particular
place to look for his downbeats, I think if I had to guess
his favorite place for a downbeat it would be at about the
two o’clock position in his egg pattern. His egg pattern was
a big egg shape circle thing he did, one to a beat, no
matter what the meter. I imagine many students of the art of
conducting wish they could learn that pattern, as it looks
pretty convenient to use when you aren’t sure what’s going
on. He favored that pattern, and come to think of it, I was
wrong when above I said there were never two measures the
same in a row. He used the egg pattern quite a lot.

When I first moved to Seattle and saw the Seattle Symphony I
thought they were terrible. But later I saw them under a
guest conductor’s baton--someone who conducts in a more,
shall we say, traditional manner. And I realized that the
Seattle Symphony is a really good group. But every time I
saw Schwarz conduct there were so many ragged cues and
strange dynamics that I decided it was Schwarz’s conducting
that does it. I may be wrong. In any case, I thought
Saturday’s performance was good, but there were many
instances of Schwarz appearing to try tempos and cues that
were just ignored.

In fairness to Mr. Schwarz he struck me as a little more
useful in the concerto than in the Midsummer Night’s Dream.
I think it’s because it would be rude to jump and wave
around too much when the spotlight is supposed to be on the
soloist. And then in the Strauss, which is a much harder
piece, he mellowed out again for certain parts--in
particular for the difficult woodwind counterpoint bits in
the first section.

If I had to guess I’d guess that the rationale is that for
most of what they play--particularly for something as
standard as the first Mendelssohn piece--the orchestra knows
it so well that they don’t need the conductor, so he’s
really just there to impress the blue-hairs with his wild
flamboyance. Just like a real live eccentric musical genius.
If that’s the case then I’m sure they were impressed. He
even managed one or two fully aerial hops. Leonard Bernstein
would be proud.

The next morning, Sunday the 6th of June (D-Day) I attended
eleven o’clock mass at St. Mark’s Cathedral on Capital Hill
in Seattle. They had the ‘Cathedral Choir' singing with Mel
Butler directing.

Being an atheist, I haven’t set foot in a church for years.
Not a big one, anyway. And boy is this thing huge. This was,
I think, an Episcopalian church, and even Catholics in a bad
mood don’t have architecture as stern as this place. There
were huge flying buttresses made of unremitting blank dark
grey concrete and fifty foot stained glass windows with
nothing but cheerless rectangles of lightly tinted glass.

But the organ. Man, was that organ something else. A real,
bona-fide giant of an organ with 32-foot stops as big around
as oil barrels.

But I digress.

First they played a Voluntary on the organ alone. Then
conducted singing with the choir. But they were obscured
behind some kind of rotating windows structure. I thought
all was lost and I wouldn’t be able to see the conducting,
but then they moved to the loft above and behind the
congregation (by the organ manuals). Then there was a whole
bunch of church stuff. Stand up, listen to a sermon...
something about flying trapeze artists...? Strange. Sing a
hymn from the little blue book. Sit down. Stand up. Finally
some conducted choir singing that was very nicely done. The
conducting was very straight-forward. You could always see
the beat and you could always see the downbeat. It was a
lucky thing we sat way in front, because otherwise we
wouldn’t have been able to see the conductor. As it was I
had to turn around to watch, and face all those stern faces,
bowed in silent contemplation.

Then the priest fellow broke some communion pita bread in
half. I hadn't intended to do the whole body of Christ/blood
of Christ thing. I’m against cannibalism, sort of on
principle.

But you know. Everyone was doing it.

And besides, I hadn’t had breakfast that day and being a
chump, I thought we were each going to get half a piece of
pita bread. Needless to say, all I got was one lousy little
tab of Jesus to hold me until lunch.

But I digress.

As an ex-singer I thought it would be pretty easy to follow
this conductor. He mostly mirrored his right hand with his
left all the time, but despite that, his beats were clear,
his choir stayed together and he communicated through size
of pattern and beat styles just what he wanted them to do,
and they did it. In fact, the big chunk from someone’s Te
Deum for chorus and organ (I'm afraid I missed the name of
the composer) was really damned good. Excuse me--was really
darned good. The only other thing to report about him was
his tendency to nod his head at the choir. The more intense
he wanted the music to get, the more vigorously he nodded
his head at them. But the bottom line is that it worked. The
conducting, rather than merely there for show, actually
added a musical element to the proceedings.

Gerard Schwarz is bringing the Seattle Symphony up the the
level of a true top-flight band. His avowed programming
system--in which he tries to gain the trust of the audience
with standard repertoire so that he can eventually begin to
slip in the more adventurous, modern work--is laudable in
the extreme. So it is only advisedly that I criticize his
conducting style. In fairness, his methods are no more
guilty of empty showmanship than those of any number of
well-known and well-respected conductors, and his choices of
repertoire as a recording artist are unmatched. But in the
end, it is the conductors who place the music first and
above all things in concert--even the blue-hairs--who rise
to the level of real greatness, such as it is.

     Evans Winner
     Seattle, Washington
     June, 2004
